@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU Guile Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C)  1996, 1997, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2007, 2009, 2010
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file guile.texi for copying conditions.

@node Scheduling
@section Threads, Mutexes, Asyncs and Dynamic Roots

@menu
* Arbiters::                    Synchronization primitives.
* Asyncs::                      Asynchronous procedure invocation.
* Threads::                     Multiple threads of execution.
* Mutexes and Condition Variables:: Synchronization primitives.
* Blocking::                    How to block properly in guile mode.
* Critical Sections::           Avoiding concurrency and reentries.
* Fluids and Dynamic States::   Thread-local variables, etc.
* Futures::                     Fine-grain parallelism.
* Parallel Forms::              Parallel execution of forms.
@end menu


@node Arbiters
@subsection Arbiters
@cindex arbiters

Arbiters are synchronization objects, they can be used by threads to
control access to a shared resource.  An arbiter can be locked to
indicate a resource is in use, and unlocked when done.

An arbiter is like a light-weight mutex (@pxref{Mutexes and Condition
Variables}).  It uses less memory and may be faster, but there's no
way for a thread to block waiting on an arbiter, it can only test and
get the status returned.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-arbiter name
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_arbiter (name)
Return an object of type arbiter and name @var{name}. Its
state is initially unlocked.  Arbiters are a way to achieve
process synchronization.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} try-arbiter arb
@deffnx {C Function} scm_try_arbiter (arb)
If @var{arb} is unlocked, then lock it and return @code{#t}.
If @var{arb} is already locked, then do nothing and return
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} release-arbiter arb
@deffnx {C Function} scm_release_arbiter (arb)
If @var{arb} is locked, then unlock it and return @code{#t}.  If
@var{arb} is already unlocked, then do nothing and return @code{#f}.

Typical usage is for the thread which locked an arbiter to later
release it, but that's not required, any thread can release it.
@end deffn


@node Asyncs
@subsection Asyncs

@cindex asyncs
@cindex user asyncs
@cindex system asyncs

Asyncs are a means of deferring the execution of Scheme code until it is
safe to do so.

Guile provides two kinds of asyncs that share the basic concept but are
otherwise quite different: system asyncs and user asyncs.  System asyncs
are integrated into the core of Guile and are executed automatically
when the system is in a state to allow the execution of Scheme code.
For example, it is not possible to execute Scheme code in a POSIX signal
handler, but such a signal handler can queue a system async to be
executed in the near future, when it is safe to do so.

System asyncs can also be queued for threads other than the current one.
This way, you can cause threads to asynchronously execute arbitrary
code.

User asyncs offer a convenient means of queuing procedures for future
execution and triggering this execution.  They will not be executed
automatically.

@menu
* System asyncs::
* User asyncs::
@end menu

@node System asyncs
@subsubsection System asyncs

To cause the future asynchronous execution of a procedure in a given
thread, use @code{system-async-mark}.

Automatic invocation of system asyncs can be temporarily disabled by
calling @code{call-with-blocked-asyncs}.  This function works by
temporarily increasing the @emph{async blocking level} of the current
thread while a given procedure is running.  The blocking level starts
out at zero, and whenever a safe point is reached, a blocking level
greater than zero will prevent the execution of queued asyncs.

Analogously, the procedure @code{call-with-unblocked-asyncs} will
temporarily decrease the blocking level of the current thread.  You
can use it when you want to disable asyncs by default and only allow
them temporarily.

In addition to the C versions of @code{call-with-blocked-asyncs} and
@code{call-with-unblocked-asyncs}, C code can use
@code{scm_dynwind_block_asyncs} and @code{scm_dynwind_unblock_asyncs}
inside a @dfn{dynamic context} (@pxref{Dynamic Wind}) to block or
unblock system asyncs temporarily.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} system-async-mark proc [thread]
@deffnx {C Function} scm_system_async_mark (proc)
@deffnx {C Function} scm_system_async_mark_for_thread (proc, thread)
Mark @var{proc} (a procedure with zero arguments) for future execution
in @var{thread}.  When @var{proc} has already been marked for
@var{thread} but has not been executed yet, this call has no effect.
When @var{thread} is omitted, the thread that called
@code{system-async-mark} is used.

This procedure is not safe to be called from signal handlers.  Use
@code{scm_sigaction} or @code{scm_sigaction_for_thread} to install
signal handlers.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} call-with-blocked-asyncs proc
@deffnx {C Function} scm_call_with_blocked_asyncs (proc)
Call @var{proc} and block the execution of system asyncs by one level
for the current thread while it is running.  Return the value returned
by @var{proc}.  For the first two variants, call @var{proc} with no
arguments; for the third, call it with @var{data}.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Function} {void *} scm_c_call_with_blocked_asyncs (void * (*proc) (void *data), void *data)
The same but with a C function @var{proc} instead of a Scheme thunk.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} call-with-unblocked-asyncs proc
@deffnx {C Function} scm_call_with_unblocked_asyncs (proc)
Call @var{proc} and unblock the execution of system asyncs by one
level for the current thread while it is running.  Return the value
returned by @var{proc}.  For the first two variants, call @var{proc}
with no arguments; for the third, call it with @var{data}.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Function} {void *} scm_c_call_with_unblocked_asyncs (void *(*proc) (void *data), void *data)
The same but with a C function @var{proc} instead of a Scheme thunk.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} void scm_dynwind_block_asyncs ()
During the current dynwind context, increase the blocking of asyncs by
one level.  This function must be used inside a pair of calls to
@code{scm_dynwind_begin} and @code{scm_dynwind_end} (@pxref{Dynamic
Wind}).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} void scm_dynwind_unblock_asyncs ()
During the current dynwind context, decrease the blocking of asyncs by
one level.  This function must be used inside a pair of calls to
@code{scm_dynwind_begin} and @code{scm_dynwind_end} (@pxref{Dynamic
Wind}).
@end deftypefn

@node User asyncs
@subsubsection User asyncs

A user async is a pair of a thunk (a parameterless procedure) and a
mark.  Setting the mark on a user async will cause the thunk to be
executed when the user async is passed to @code{run-asyncs}.  Setting
the mark more than once is satisfied by one execution of the thunk.

User asyncs are created with @code{async}.  They are marked with
@code{async-mark}.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} async thunk
@deffnx {C Function} scm_async (thunk)
Create a new user async for the procedure @var{thunk}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} async-mark a
@deffnx {C Function} scm_async_mark (a)
Mark the user async @var{a} for future execution.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} run-asyncs list_of_a
@deffnx {C Function} scm_run_asyncs (list_of_a)
Execute all thunks from the marked asyncs of the list @var{list_of_a}.
@end deffn

@node Threads
@subsection Threads
@cindex threads
@cindex Guile threads
@cindex POSIX threads

Guile supports POSIX threads, unless it was configured with
@code{--without-threads} or the host lacks POSIX thread support.  When
thread support is available, the @code{threads} feature is provided
(@pxref{Feature Manipulation, @code{provided?}}).

The procedures below manipulate Guile threads, which are wrappers around
the system's POSIX threads.  For application-level parallelism, using
higher-level constructs, such as futures, is recommended
(@pxref{Futures}).

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} all-threads
@deffnx {C Function} scm_all_threads ()
Return a list of all threads.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} current-thread
@deffnx {C Function} scm_current_thread ()
Return the thread that called this function.
@end deffn

@c begin (texi-doc-string "guile" "call-with-new-thread")
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} call-with-new-thread thunk [handler]
Call @code{thunk} in a new thread and with a new dynamic state,
returning the new thread.  The procedure @var{thunk} is called via
@code{with-continuation-barrier}.

When @var{handler} is specified, then @var{thunk} is called from
within a @code{catch} with tag @code{#t} that has @var{handler} as its
handler.  This catch is established inside the continuation barrier.

Once @var{thunk} or @var{handler} returns, the return value is made
the @emph{exit value} of the thread and the thread is terminated.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Function} SCM scm_spawn_thread (scm_t_catch_body body, void *body_data, scm_t_catch_handler handler, void *handler_data)
Call @var{body} in a new thread, passing it @var{body_data}, returning
the new thread.  The function @var{body} is called via
@code{scm_c_with_continuation_barrier}.

When @var{handler} is non-@code{NULL}, @var{body} is called via
@code{scm_internal_catch} with tag @code{SCM_BOOL_T} that has
@var{handler} and @var{handler_data} as the handler and its data.  This
catch is established inside the continuation barrier.

Once @var{body} or @var{handler} returns, the return value is made the
@emph{exit value} of the thread and the thread is terminated.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} thread? obj
@deffnx {C Function} scm_thread_p (obj)
Return @code{#t} iff @var{obj} is a thread; otherwise, return
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@c begin (texi-doc-string "guile" "join-thread")
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} join-thread thread [timeout [timeoutval]]
@deffnx {C Function} scm_join_thread (thread)
@deffnx {C Function} scm_join_thread_timed (thread, timeout, timeoutval)
Wait for @var{thread} to terminate and return its exit value.  Threads
that have not been created with @code{call-with-new-thread} or
@code{scm_spawn_thread} have an exit value of @code{#f}.  When
@var{timeout} is given, it specifies a point in time where the waiting
should be aborted.  It can be either an integer as returned by
@code{current-time} or a pair as returned by @code{gettimeofday}.
When the waiting is aborted, @var{timeoutval} is returned (if it is
specified; @code{#f} is returned otherwise).
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} thread-exited? thread
@deffnx {C Function} scm_thread_exited_p (thread)
Return @code{#t} iff @var{thread} has exited.
@end deffn

@c begin (texi-doc-string "guile" "yield")
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} yield
If one or more threads are waiting to execute, calling yield forces an
immediate context switch to one of them. Otherwise, yield has no effect.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} cancel-thread thread
@deffnx {C Function} scm_cancel_thread (thread)
Asynchronously notify @var{thread} to exit.  Immediately after
receiving this notification, @var{thread} will call its cleanup handler
(if one has been set) and then terminate, aborting any evaluation that
is in progress.

Because Guile threads are isomorphic with POSIX threads, @var{thread}
will not receive its cancellation signal until it reaches a cancellation
point.  See your operating system's POSIX threading documentation for
more information on cancellation points; note that in Guile, unlike
native POSIX threads, a thread can receive a cancellation notification
while attempting to lock a mutex.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} set-thread-cleanup! thread proc
@deffnx {C Function} scm_set_thread_cleanup_x (thread, proc)
Set @var{proc} as the cleanup handler for the thread @var{thread}.
@var{proc}, which must be a thunk, will be called when @var{thread}
exits, either normally or by being canceled.  Thread cleanup handlers
can be used to perform useful tasks like releasing resources, such as
locked mutexes, when thread exit cannot be predicted.

The return value of @var{proc} will be set as the @emph{exit value} of
@var{thread}.

To remove a cleanup handler, pass @code{#f} for @var{proc}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} thread-cleanup thread
@deffnx {C Function} scm_thread_cleanup (thread)
Return the cleanup handler currently installed for the thread
@var{thread}.  If no cleanup handler is currently installed,
thread-cleanup returns @code{#f}.
@end deffn

Higher level thread procedures are available by loading the
@code{(ice-9 threads)} module.  These provide standardized
thread creation.

@deffn macro make-thread proc [args@dots{}]
Apply @var{proc} to @var{args} in a new thread formed by
@code{call-with-new-thread} using a default error handler that display
the error to the current error port.  The @var{args@dots{}}
expressions are evaluated in the new thread.
@end deffn

@deffn macro begin-thread first [rest@dots{}]
Evaluate forms @var{first} and @var{rest} in a new thread formed by
@code{call-with-new-thread} using a default error handler that display
the error to the current error port.
@end deffn

@node Mutexes and Condition Variables
@subsection Mutexes and Condition Variables
@cindex mutex
@cindex condition variable

A mutex is a thread synchronization object, it can be used by threads
to control access to a shared resource.  A mutex can be locked to
indicate a resource is in use, and other threads can then block on the
mutex to wait for the resource (or can just test and do something else
if not available).  ``Mutex'' is short for ``mutual exclusion''.

There are two types of mutexes in Guile, ``standard'' and
``recursive''.  They're created by @code{make-mutex} and
@code{make-recursive-mutex} respectively, the operation functions are
then common to both.

Note that for both types of mutex there's no protection against a
``deadly embrace''.  For instance if one thread has locked mutex A and
is waiting on mutex B, but another thread owns B and is waiting on A,
then an endless wait will occur (in the current implementation).
Acquiring requisite mutexes in a fixed order (like always A before B)
in all threads is one way to avoid such problems.

@sp 1
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-mutex . flags
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_mutex ()
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_mutex_with_flags (SCM flags)
Return a new mutex.  It is initially unlocked.  If @var{flags} is
specified, it must be a list of symbols specifying configuration flags
for the newly-created mutex.  The supported flags are:
@table @code
@item unchecked-unlock
Unless this flag is present, a call to `unlock-mutex' on the returned
mutex when it is already unlocked will cause an error to be signalled.

@item allow-external-unlock
Allow the returned mutex to be unlocked by the calling thread even if
it was originally locked by a different thread.

@item recursive
The returned mutex will be recursive.

@end table
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} mutex? obj
@deffnx {C Function} scm_mutex_p (obj)
Return @code{#t} iff @var{obj} is a mutex; otherwise, return
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-recursive-mutex
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_recursive_mutex ()
Create a new recursive mutex.  It is initially unlocked.  Calling this
function is equivalent to calling `make-mutex' and specifying the
@code{recursive} flag.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} lock-mutex mutex [timeout [owner]]
@deffnx {C Function} scm_lock_mutex (mutex)
@deffnx {C Function} scm_lock_mutex_timed (mutex, timeout, owner)
Lock @var{mutex}.  If the mutex is already locked, then block and
return only when @var{mutex} has been acquired.

When @var{timeout} is given, it specifies a point in time where the
waiting should be aborted.  It can be either an integer as returned
by @code{current-time} or a pair as returned by @code{gettimeofday}.
When the waiting is aborted, @code{#f} is returned.

When @var{owner} is given, it specifies an owner for @var{mutex} other
than the calling thread.  @var{owner} may also be @code{#f},
indicating that the mutex should be locked but left unowned.

For standard mutexes (@code{make-mutex}), and error is signalled if
the thread has itself already locked @var{mutex}.

For a recursive mutex (@code{make-recursive-mutex}), if the thread has
itself already locked @var{mutex}, then a further @code{lock-mutex}
call increments the lock count.  An additional @code{unlock-mutex}
will be required to finally release.

If @var{mutex} was locked by a thread that exited before unlocking it,
the next attempt to lock @var{mutex} will succeed, but
@code{abandoned-mutex-error} will be signalled.

When a system async (@pxref{System asyncs}) is activated for a thread
blocked in @code{lock-mutex}, the wait is interrupted and the async is
executed.  When the async returns, the wait resumes.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Function} void scm_dynwind_lock_mutex (SCM mutex)
Arrange for @var{mutex} to be locked whenever the current dynwind
context is entered and to be unlocked when it is exited.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} try-mutex mx
@deffnx {C Function} scm_try_mutex (mx)
Try to lock @var{mutex} as per @code{lock-mutex}.  If @var{mutex} can
be acquired immediately then this is done and the return is @code{#t}.
If @var{mutex} is locked by some other thread then nothing is done and
the return is @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} unlock-mutex mutex [condvar [timeout]]
@deffnx {C Function} scm_unlock_mutex (mutex)
@deffnx {C Function} scm_unlock_mutex_timed (mutex, condvar, timeout)
Unlock @var{mutex}.  An error is signalled if @var{mutex} is not locked
and was not created with the @code{unchecked-unlock} flag set, or if
@var{mutex} is locked by a thread other than the calling thread and was
not created with the @code{allow-external-unlock} flag set.

If @var{condvar} is given, it specifies a condition variable upon
which the calling thread will wait to be signalled before returning.
(This behavior is very similar to that of
@code{wait-condition-variable}, except that the mutex is left in an
unlocked state when the function returns.)

When @var{timeout} is also given, it specifies a point in time where
the waiting should be aborted.  It can be either an integer as
returned by @code{current-time} or a pair as returned by
@code{gettimeofday}.  When the waiting is aborted, @code{#f} is
returned.  Otherwise the function returns @code{#t}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} mutex-owner mutex
@deffnx {C Function} scm_mutex_owner (mutex)
Return the current owner of @var{mutex}, in the form of a thread or
@code{#f} (indicating no owner).  Note that a mutex may be unowned but
still locked.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} mutex-level mutex
@deffnx {C Function} scm_mutex_level (mutex)
Return the current lock level of @var{mutex}.  If @var{mutex} is
currently unlocked, this value will be 0; otherwise, it will be the
number of times @var{mutex} has been recursively locked by its current
owner.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} mutex-locked? mutex
@deffnx {C Function} scm_mutex_locked_p (mutex)
Return @code{#t} if @var{mutex} is locked, regardless of ownership;
otherwise, return @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-condition-variable
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_condition_variable ()
Return a new condition variable.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} condition-variable? obj
@deffnx {C Function} scm_condition_variable_p (obj)
Return @code{#t} iff @var{obj} is a condition variable; otherwise,
return @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} wait-condition-variable condvar mutex [time]
@deffnx {C Function} scm_wait_condition_variable (condvar, mutex, time)
Wait until @var{condvar} has been signalled.  While waiting,
@var{mutex} is atomically unlocked (as with @code{unlock-mutex}) and
is locked again when this function returns.  When @var{time} is given,
it specifies a point in time where the waiting should be aborted.  It
can be either a integer as returned by @code{current-time} or a pair
as returned by @code{gettimeofday}.  When the waiting is aborted,
@code{#f} is returned.  When the condition variable has in fact been
signalled, @code{#t} is returned.  The mutex is re-locked in any case
before @code{wait-condition-variable} returns.

When a system async is activated for a thread that is blocked in a
call to @code{wait-condition-variable}, the waiting is interrupted,
the mutex is locked, and the async is executed.  When the async
returns, the mutex is unlocked again and the waiting is resumed.  When
the thread block while re-acquiring the mutex, execution of asyncs is
blocked.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} signal-condition-variable condvar
@deffnx {C Function} scm_signal_condition_variable (condvar)
Wake up one thread that is waiting for @var{condvar}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} broadcast-condition-variable condvar
@deffnx {C Function} scm_broadcast_condition_variable (condvar)
Wake up all threads that are waiting for @var{condvar}.
@end deffn

@sp 1
The following are higher level operations on mutexes.  These are
available from

@example
(use-modules (ice-9 threads))
@end example

@deffn macro with-mutex mutex [body@dots{}]
Lock @var{mutex}, evaluate the @var{body} forms, then unlock
@var{mutex}.  The return value is the return from the last @var{body}
form.

The lock, body and unlock form the branches of a @code{dynamic-wind}
(@pxref{Dynamic Wind}), so @var{mutex} is automatically unlocked if an
error or new continuation exits @var{body}, and is re-locked if
@var{body} is re-entered by a captured continuation.
@end deffn

@deffn macro monitor body@dots{}
Evaluate the @var{body} forms, with a mutex locked so only one thread
can execute that code at any one time.  The return value is the return
from the last @var{body} form.

Each @code{monitor} form has its own private mutex and the locking and
evaluation is as per @code{with-mutex} above.  A standard mutex
(@code{make-mutex}) is used, which means @var{body} must not
recursively re-enter the @code{monitor} form.

The term ``monitor'' comes from operating system theory, where it
means a particular bit of code managing access to some resource and
which only ever executes on behalf of one process at any one time.
@end deffn


@node Blocking
@subsection Blocking in Guile Mode

Up to Guile version 1.8, a thread blocked in guile mode would prevent
the garbage collector from running.  Thus threads had to explicitly
leave guile mode with @code{scm_without_guile ()} before making a
potentially blocking call such as a mutex lock, a @code{select ()}
system call, etc.  The following functions could be used to temporarily
leave guile mode or to perform some common blocking operations in a
supported way.

Starting from Guile 2.0, blocked threads no longer hinder garbage
collection.  Thus, the functions below are not needed anymore.  They can
still be used to inform the GC that a thread is about to block, giving
it a (small) optimization opportunity for ``stop the world'' garbage
collections, should they occur while the thread is blocked.

@deftypefn {C Function} {void *} scm_without_guile (void *(*func) (void *), void *data)
Leave guile mode, call @var{func} on @var{data}, enter guile mode and
return the result of calling @var{func}.

While a thread has left guile mode, it must not call any libguile
functions except @code{scm_with_guile} or @code{scm_without_guile} and
must not use any libguile macros.  Also, local variables of type
@code{SCM} that are allocated while not in guile mode are not
protected from the garbage collector.

When used from non-guile mode, calling @code{scm_without_guile} is
still allowed: it simply calls @var{func}.  In that way, you can leave
guile mode without having to know whether the current thread is in
guile mode or not.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} int scm_pthread_mutex_lock (pthread_mutex_t *mutex)
Like @code{pthread_mutex_lock}, but leaves guile mode while waiting for
the mutex.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn  {C Function} int scm_pthread_cond_wait (pthread_cond_t *cond, pthread_mutex_t *mutex)
@deftypefnx {C Function} int scm_pthread_cond_timedwait (pthread_cond_t *cond, pthread_mutex_t *mutex, struct timespec *abstime)
Like @code{pthread_cond_wait} and @code{pthread_cond_timedwait}, but
leaves guile mode while waiting for the condition variable.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} int scm_std_select (int nfds, fd_set *readfds, fd_set *writefds, fd_set *exceptfds, struct timeval *timeout)
Like @code{select} but leaves guile mode while waiting.  Also, the
delivery of a system async causes this function to be interrupted with
error code @code{EINTR}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} {unsigned int} scm_std_sleep ({unsigned int} seconds)
Like @code{sleep}, but leaves guile mode while sleeping.  Also, the
delivery of a system async causes this function to be interrupted.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} {unsigned long} scm_std_usleep ({unsigned long} usecs)
Like @code{usleep}, but leaves guile mode while sleeping.  Also, the
delivery of a system async causes this function to be interrupted.
@end deftypefn


@node Critical Sections
@subsection Critical Sections

@deffn  {C Macro} SCM_CRITICAL_SECTION_START
@deffnx {C Macro} SCM_CRITICAL_SECTION_END
These two macros can be used to delimit a critical section.
Syntactically, they are both statements and need to be followed
immediately by a semicolon.

Executing @code{SCM_CRITICAL_SECTION_START} will lock a recursive
mutex and block the executing of system asyncs.  Executing
@code{SCM_CRITICAL_SECTION_END} will unblock the execution of system
asyncs and unlock the mutex.  Thus, the code that executes between
these two macros can only be executed in one thread at any one time
and no system asyncs will run.  However, because the mutex is a
recursive one, the code might still be reentered by the same thread.
You must either allow for this or avoid it, both by careful coding.

On the other hand, critical sections delimited with these macros can
be nested since the mutex is recursive.

You must make sure that for each @code{SCM_CRITICAL_SECTION_START},
the corresponding @code{SCM_CRITICAL_SECTION_END} is always executed.
This means that no non-local exit (such as a signalled error) might
happen, for example.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Function} void scm_dynwind_critical_section (SCM mutex)
Call @code{scm_dynwind_lock_mutex} on @var{mutex} and call
@code{scm_dynwind_block_asyncs}.  When @var{mutex} is false, a recursive
mutex provided by Guile is used instead.

The effect of a call to @code{scm_dynwind_critical_section} is that
the current dynwind context (@pxref{Dynamic Wind}) turns into a
critical section.  Because of the locked mutex, no second thread can
enter it concurrently and because of the blocked asyncs, no system
async can reenter it from the current thread.

When the current thread reenters the critical section anyway, the kind
of @var{mutex} determines what happens: When @var{mutex} is recursive,
the reentry is allowed.  When it is a normal mutex, an error is
signalled.
@end deftypefn


@node Fluids and Dynamic States
@subsection Fluids and Dynamic States

@cindex fluids

A @emph{fluid} is an object that can store one value per @emph{dynamic
state}.  Each thread has a current dynamic state, and when accessing a
fluid, this current dynamic state is used to provide the actual value.
In this way, fluids can be used for thread local storage, but they are
in fact more flexible: dynamic states are objects of their own and can
be made current for more than one thread at the same time, or only be
made current temporarily, for example.

Fluids can also be used to simulate the desirable effects of
dynamically scoped variables.  Dynamically scoped variables are useful
when you want to set a variable to a value during some dynamic extent
in the execution of your program and have them revert to their
original value when the control flow is outside of this dynamic
extent.  See the description of @code{with-fluids} below for details.

New fluids are created with @code{make-fluid} and @code{fluid?} is
used for testing whether an object is actually a fluid.  The values
stored in a fluid can be accessed with @code{fluid-ref} and
@code{fluid-set!}.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-fluid
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_fluid ()
Return a newly created fluid.
Fluids are objects that can hold one
value per dynamic state.  That is, modifications to this value are
only visible to code that executes with the same dynamic state as
the modifying code.  When a new dynamic state is constructed, it
inherits the values from its parent.  Because each thread normally executes
with its own dynamic state, you can use fluids for thread local storage.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-unbound-fluid
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_unbound_fluid ()
Return a new fluid that is initially unbound (instead of being
implicitly bound to @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} fluid? obj
@deffnx {C Function} scm_fluid_p (obj)
Return @code{#t} iff @var{obj} is a fluid; otherwise, return
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} fluid-ref fluid
@deffnx {C Function} scm_fluid_ref (fluid)
Return the value associated with @var{fluid} in the current
dynamic root.  If @var{fluid} has not been set, then return
@code{#f}. Calling @code{fluid-ref} on an unbound fluid produces a
runtime error.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} fluid-set! fluid value
@deffnx {C Function} scm_fluid_set_x (fluid, value)
Set the value associated with @var{fluid} in the current dynamic root.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} fluid-unset! fluid
@deffnx {C Function} scm_fluid_unset_x (fluid)
Disassociate the given fluid from any value, making it unbound.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} fluid-bound? fluid
@deffnx {C Function} scm_fluid_bound_p (fluid)
Returns @code{#t} iff the given fluid is bound to a value, otherwise
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@code{with-fluids*} temporarily changes the values of one or more fluids,
so that the given procedure and each procedure called by it access the
given values.  After the procedure returns, the old values are restored.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} with-fluid* fluid value thunk
@deffnx {C Function} scm_with_fluid (fluid, value, thunk)
Set @var{fluid} to @var{value} temporarily, and call @var{thunk}.
@var{thunk} must be a procedure with no argument.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} with-fluids* fluids values thunk
@deffnx {C Function} scm_with_fluids (fluids, values, thunk)
Set @var{fluids} to @var{values} temporary, and call @var{thunk}.
@var{fluids} must be a list of fluids and @var{values} must be the
same number of their values to be applied.  Each substitution is done
in the order given.  @var{thunk} must be a procedure with no argument.
It is called inside a @code{dynamic-wind} and the fluids are
set/restored when control enter or leaves the established dynamic
extent.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Macro} with-fluids ((fluid value) ...) body...
Execute @var{body...} while each @var{fluid} is set to the
corresponding @var{value}.  Both @var{fluid} and @var{value} are
evaluated and @var{fluid} must yield a fluid.  @var{body...} is
executed inside a @code{dynamic-wind} and the fluids are set/restored
when control enter or leaves the established dynamic extent.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Function} SCM scm_c_with_fluids (SCM fluids, SCM vals, SCM (*cproc)(void *), void *data)
@deftypefnx {C Function} SCM scm_c_with_fluid (SCM fluid, SCM val, SCM (*cproc)(void *), void *data)
The function @code{scm_c_with_fluids} is like @code{scm_with_fluids}
except that it takes a C function to call instead of a Scheme thunk.

The function @code{scm_c_with_fluid} is similar but only allows one
fluid to be set instead of a list.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Function} void scm_dynwind_fluid (SCM fluid, SCM val)
This function must be used inside a pair of calls to
@code{scm_dynwind_begin} and @code{scm_dynwind_end} (@pxref{Dynamic
Wind}).  During the dynwind context, the fluid @var{fluid} is set to
@var{val}.

More precisely, the value of the fluid is swapped with a `backup'
value whenever the dynwind context is entered or left.  The backup
value is initialized with the @var{val} argument.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-dynamic-state [parent]
@deffnx {C Function} scm_make_dynamic_state (parent)
Return a copy of the dynamic state object @var{parent}
or of the current dynamic state when @var{parent} is omitted.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} dynamic-state? obj
@deffnx {C Function} scm_dynamic_state_p (obj)
Return @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a dynamic state object;
return @code{#f} otherwise.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Procedure} int scm_is_dynamic_state (SCM obj)
Return non-zero if @var{obj} is a dynamic state object;
return zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} current-dynamic-state
@deffnx {C Function} scm_current_dynamic_state ()
Return the current dynamic state object.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} set-current-dynamic-state state
@deffnx {C Function} scm_set_current_dynamic_state (state)
Set the current dynamic state object to @var{state}
and return the previous current dynamic state object.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} with-dynamic-state state proc
@deffnx {C Function} scm_with_dynamic_state (state, proc)
Call @var{proc} while @var{state} is the current dynamic
state object.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {C Procedure} void scm_dynwind_current_dynamic_state (SCM state)
Set the current dynamic state to @var{state} for the current dynwind
context.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {C Procedure} {void *} scm_c_with_dynamic_state (SCM state, void *(*func)(void *), void *data)
Like @code{scm_with_dynamic_state}, but call @var{func} with
@var{data}.
@end deftypefn

@node Futures
@subsection Futures
@cindex futures
@cindex fine-grain parallelism
@cindex parallelism

The @code{(ice-9 futures)} module provides @dfn{futures}, a construct
for fine-grain parallelism.  A future is a wrapper around an expression
whose computation may occur in parallel with the code of the calling
thread, and possibly in parallel with other futures.  Like promises,
futures are essentially proxies that can be queried to obtain the value
of the enclosed expression:

@lisp
(touch (future (+ 2 3)))
@result{} 5
@end lisp

However, unlike promises, the expression associated with a future may be
evaluated on another CPU core, should one be available.  This supports
@dfn{fine-grain parallelism}, because even relatively small computations
can be embedded in futures.  Consider this sequential code:

@lisp
(define (find-prime lst1 lst2)
  (or (find prime? lst1)
      (find prime? lst2)))
@end lisp

The two arms of @code{or} are potentially computation-intensive.  They
are independent of one another, yet, they are evaluated sequentially
when the first one returns @code{#f}.  Using futures, one could rewrite
it like this:

@lisp
(define (find-prime lst1 lst2)
  (let ((f (future (find prime? lst2))))
    (or (find prime? lst1)
        (touch f))))
@end lisp

This preserves the semantics of @code{find-prime}.  On a multi-core
machine, though, the computation of @code{(find prime? lst2)} may be
done in parallel with that of the other @code{find} call, which can
reduce the execution time of @code{find-prime}.

Note that futures are intended for the evaluation of purely functional
expressions.  Expressions that have side-effects or rely on I/O may
require additional care, such as explicit synchronization
(@pxref{Mutexes and Condition Variables}).

Guile's futures are implemented on top of POSIX threads
(@pxref{Threads}).  Internally, a fixed-size pool of threads is used to
evaluate futures, such that offloading the evaluation of an expression
to another thread doesn't incur thread creation costs.  By default, the
pool contains one thread per available CPU core, minus one, to account
for the main thread.  The number of available CPU cores is determined
using @code{current-processor-count} (@pxref{Processes}).

@deffn {Scheme Syntax} future exp
Return a future for expression @var{exp}.  This is equivalent to:

@lisp
(make-future (lambda () exp))
@end lisp
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} make-future thunk
Return a future for @var{thunk}, a zero-argument procedure.

This procedure returns immediately.  Execution of @var{thunk} may begin
in parallel with the calling thread's computations, if idle CPU cores
are available, or it may start when @code{touch} is invoked on the
returned future.

If the execution of @var{thunk} throws an exception, that exception will
be re-thrown when @code{touch} is invoked on the returned future.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} future? obj
Return @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a future.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} touch f
Return the result of the expression embedded in future @var{f}.

If the result was already computed in parallel, @code{touch} returns
instantaneously.  Otherwise, it waits for the computation to complete,
if it already started, or initiates it.
@end deffn


@node Parallel Forms
@subsection Parallel forms
@cindex parallel forms

The functions described in this section are available from

@example
(use-modules (ice-9 threads))
@end example

They provide high-level parallel constructs.  The following functions
are implemented in terms of futures (@pxref{Futures}).  Thus they are
relatively cheap as they re-use existing threads, and portable, since
they automatically use one thread per available CPU core.

@deffn syntax parallel expr1 @dots{} exprN
Evaluate each @var{expr} expression in parallel, each in its own thread.
Return the results as a set of @var{N} multiple values
(@pxref{Multiple Values}).
@end deffn

@deffn syntax letpar ((var1 expr1) @dots{} (varN exprN)) body@dots{}
Evaluate each @var{expr} in parallel, each in its own thread, then bind
the results to the corresponding @var{var} variables and evaluate
@var{body}.

@code{letpar} is like @code{let} (@pxref{Local Bindings}), but all the
expressions for the bindings are evaluated in parallel.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} par-map proc lst1 @dots{} lstN
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} par-for-each proc lst1 @dots{} lstN
Call @var{proc} on the elements of the given lists.  @code{par-map}
returns a list comprising the return values from @var{proc}.
@code{par-for-each} returns an unspecified value, but waits for all
calls to complete.

The @var{proc} calls are @code{(@var{proc} @var{elem1} @dots{}
@var{elemN})}, where each @var{elem} is from the corresponding
@var{lst}.  Each @var{lst} must be the same length.  The calls are
potentially made in parallel, depending on the number of CPU cores
available.

These functions are like @code{map} and @code{for-each} (@pxref{List
Mapping}), but make their @var{proc} calls in parallel.
@end deffn

Unlike those above, the functions described below take a number of
threads as an argument.  This makes them inherently non-portable since
the specified number of threads may differ from the number of available
CPU cores as returned by @code{current-processor-count}
(@pxref{Processes}).  In addition, these functions create the specified
number of threads when they are called and terminate them upon
completion, which makes them quite expensive.

Therefore, they should be avoided.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} n-par-map n proc lst1 @dots{} lstN
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} n-par-for-each n proc lst1 @dots{} lstN
Call @var{proc} on the elements of the given lists, in the same way as
@code{par-map} and @code{par-for-each} above, but use no more than
@var{n} threads at any one time.  The order in which calls are
initiated within that threads limit is unspecified.

These functions are good for controlling resource consumption if
@var{proc} calls might be costly, or if there are many to be made.  On
a dual-CPU system for instance @math{@var{n}=4} might be enough to
keep the CPUs utilized, and not consume too much memory.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} n-for-each-par-map n sproc pproc lst1 @dots{} lstN
Apply @var{pproc} to the elements of the given lists, and apply
@var{sproc} to each result returned by @var{pproc}.  The final return
value is unspecified, but all calls will have been completed before
returning.

The calls made are @code{(@var{sproc} (@var{pproc} @var{elem1} @dots{}
@var{elemN}))}, where each @var{elem} is from the corresponding
@var{lst}.  Each @var{lst} must have the same number of elements.

The @var{pproc} calls are made in parallel, in separate threads.  No more
than @var{n} threads are used at any one time.  The order in which
@var{pproc} calls are initiated within that limit is unspecified.

The @var{sproc} calls are made serially, in list element order, one at
a time.  @var{pproc} calls on later elements may execute in parallel
with the @var{sproc} calls.  Exactly which thread makes each
@var{sproc} call is unspecified.

This function is designed for individual calculations that can be done
in parallel, but with results needing to be handled serially, for
instance to write them to a file.  The @var{n} limit on threads
controls system resource usage when there are many calculations or
when they might be costly.

It will be seen that @code{n-for-each-par-map} is like a combination
of @code{n-par-map} and @code{for-each},

@example
(for-each sproc (n-par-map n pproc lst1 ... lstN))
@end example

@noindent
But the actual implementation is more efficient since each @var{sproc}
call, in turn, can be initiated once the relevant @var{pproc} call has
completed, it doesn't need to wait for all to finish.
@end deffn



@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "guile.texi"
@c End:
