@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU Guile Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C)  1996, 1997, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2009, 2011
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file guile.texi for copying conditions.

@page
@node Autoconf Support
@chapter Autoconf Support

When Guile is installed, a pkg-config description file and a set of
Autoconf macros is installed.  This chapter documents pkg-config and
Autoconf support, as well as the high-level guile-tool Autofrisk.

@menu
* Autoconf Background::         Why use autoconf?
* Autoconf Macros::             The GUILE_* macros.
* Using Autoconf Macros::       How to use them, plus examples.
* Autofrisk::                   AUTOFRISK_CHECKS and AUTOFRISK_SUMMARY.
* Using Autofrisk::             Example modules.af files.
@end menu


@node Autoconf Background
@section Autoconf Background

As explained in the @cite{GNU Autoconf Manual}, any package needs
configuration at build-time (@pxref{Top, ,Introduction,autoconf,The GNU
Autoconf Manual}).  If your package uses Guile (or uses a package that
in turn uses Guile), you probably need to know what specific Guile
features are available and details about them.

The way to do this is to write feature tests and arrange for their execution
by the @file{configure} script, typically by adding the tests to
@file{configure.ac}, and running @code{autoconf} to create @file{configure}.
Users of your package then run @file{configure} in the normal way.

Macros are a way to make common feature tests easy to express.
Autoconf provides a wide range of macros 
(@pxref{Existing Tests,,,autoconf,The GNU Autoconf Manual}), 
and Guile installation provides Guile-specific tests in the areas of:
program detection, compilation flags reporting, and Scheme module
checks.


@node Autoconf Macros
@section Autoconf Macros

@cindex pkg-config
@cindex autoconf

GNU Guile provides a @dfn{pkg-config} description file, which contains
all the information necessary to compile and link C applications that
use Guile.  The @code{pkg-config} program is able to read this file
and provide this information to application programmers; it can be
obtained at @url{http://pkg-config.freedesktop.org/}.

The following command lines give respectively the C compilation and link
flags needed to build Guile-using programs:

@example
pkg-config guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION} --cflags
pkg-config guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION} --libs
@end example

To ease use of pkg-config with Autoconf, pkg-config comes with a
convenient Autoconf macro.  The following example looks for Guile and
sets the @code{GUILE_CFLAGS} and @code{GUILE_LIBS} variables
accordingly, or prints an error and exits if Guile was not found:

@findex PKG_CHECK_MODULES

@example
PKG_CHECK_MODULES([GUILE], [guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}])
@end example

Guile comes with additional Autoconf macros providing more information,
installed as @file{@var{prefix}/share/aclocal/guile.m4}.  Their names
all begin with @code{GUILE_}.

@c see Makefile.am
@include autoconf-macros.texi


@node Using Autoconf Macros
@section Using Autoconf Macros

Using the autoconf macros is straightforward: Add the macro "calls" (actually
instantiations) to @file{configure.ac}, run @code{aclocal}, and finally,
run @code{autoconf}.  If your system doesn't have guile.m4 installed, place
the desired macro definitions (@code{AC_DEFUN} forms) in @file{acinclude.m4},
and @code{aclocal} will do the right thing.

Some of the macros can be used inside normal shell constructs: @code{if foo ;
then GUILE_BAZ ; fi}, but this is not guaranteed.  It's probably a good idea
to instantiate macros at top-level.

We now include two examples, one simple and one complicated.

The first example is for a package that uses libguile, and thus needs to
know how to compile and link against it.  So we use
@code{PKG_CHECK_MODULES} to set the vars @code{GUILE_CFLAGS} and
@code{GUILE_LIBS}, which are automatically substituted in the Makefile.

@example
In configure.ac:

  PKG_CHECK_MODULES([GUILE], [guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}])

In Makefile.in:

  GUILE_CFLAGS  = @@GUILE_CFLAGS@@
  GUILE_LIBS = @@GUILE_LIBS@@

  myprog.o: myprog.c
          $(CC) -o $@ $(GUILE_CFLAGS) $<
  myprog: myprog.o
          $(CC) -o $@ $< $(GUILE_LIBS)
@end example

The second example is for a package of Guile Scheme modules that uses an
external program and other Guile Scheme modules (some might call this a "pure
scheme" package).  So we use the @code{GUILE_SITE_DIR} macro, a regular
@code{AC_PATH_PROG} macro, and the @code{GUILE_MODULE_AVAILABLE} macro.

@example
In configure.ac:

  GUILE_SITE_DIR

  probably_wont_work=""

  # pgtype pgtable
  GUILE_MODULE_AVAILABLE(have_guile_pg, (database postgres))
  test $have_guile_pg = no &&
      probably_wont_work="(my pgtype) (my pgtable) $probably_wont_work"

  # gpgutils
  AC_PATH_PROG(GNUPG,gpg)
  test x"$GNUPG" = x &&
      probably_wont_work="(my gpgutils) $probably_wont_work"

  if test ! "$probably_wont_work" = "" ; then
      p="         ***"
      echo
      echo "$p"
      echo "$p NOTE:"
      echo "$p The following modules probably won't work:"
      echo "$p   $probably_wont_work"
      echo "$p They can be installed anyway, and will work if their"
      echo "$p dependencies are installed later.  Please see README."
      echo "$p"
      echo
  fi

In Makefile.in:

  instdir = @@GUILE_SITE@@/my

  install:
        $(INSTALL) my/*.scm $(instdir)
@end example


@node Autofrisk
@section Autofrisk

The @dfn{guile-tools autofrisk} command looks for the file @file{modules.af}
in the current directory and writes out @file{modules.af.m4} containing
autoconf definitions for @code{AUTOFRISK_CHECKS} and @code{AUTOFRISK_SUMMARY}.
@xref{Autoconf Background}, and @xref{Using Autoconf Macros}, for more info.

The modules.af file consists of a series of configuration forms (Scheme
lists), which have one of the following formats:

@example
  (files-glob PATTERN ...)                      ;; required
  (non-critical-external MODULE ...)            ;; optional
  (non-critical-internal MODULE ...)            ;; optional
  (programs (MODULE PROG ...) ...)              ;; optional
  (pww-varname VARNAME)                         ;; optional
@end example

@var{pattern} is a string that may contain "*" and "?" characters to be
expanded into filenames.  @var{module} is a list of symbols naming a module,
such as `(srfi srfi-1)'.  @var{varname} is a shell-safe name to use instead of
@code{probably_wont_work}, the default.  This var is passed to `AC_SUBST'.
@var{prog} is a string that names a program, such as "gpg".

Autofrisk expands the @code{files-glob} pattern(s) into a list of files, scans
each file's module definition form(s), and constructs a module dependency
graph wherein modules defined by @code{define-module} are considered
@dfn{internal} and the remaining, @dfn{external}.  For each external module
that has an internal dependency, Autofrisk emits a
@code{GUILE_MODULE_REQUIRED} check (@pxref{Autoconf Macros}), which altogether
form the body of @code{AUTOFRISK_CHECKS}.

@code{GUILE_MODULE_REQUIRED} causes the @file{configure} script to exit with
an error message if the specified module is not available; it enforces a
strong dependency.  You can temper dependency strength by using the
@code{non-critical-external} and @code{non-critical-internal} configuration
forms in modules.af.  For graph edges that touch such non-critical modules,
Autofrisk uses @code{GUILE_MODULE_AVAILABLE}, and arranges for
@code{AUTOFRISK_SUMMARY} to display a warning if they are not found.

The shell code resulting from the expansion of @code{AUTOFRISK_CHECKS} and
@code{AUTOFRISK_SUMMARY} uses the shell variable @code{probably_wont_work} to
collect the names of unfound non-critical modules.  If this bothers you, use
configuration form @code{(pww-name foo)} in modules.af.

Although Autofrisk does not detect when a module uses a program (for example,
in a @code{system} call), it can generate @code{AC_PATH_PROG} forms anyway if
you use the @code{programs} configuration form in modules.af.  These are
collected into @code{AUTOCONF_CHECKS}.

@xref{Using Autofrisk}, for some modules.af examples.


@node Using Autofrisk
@section Using Autofrisk

Using Autofrisk (@pxref{Autofrisk}) involves writing @file{modules.af} and
adding two macro calls to @file{configure.in}.  Here is an example of the
latter:

@example
AUTOFRISK_CHECKS
AUTOFRISK_SUMMARY
@end example

Here is an adaptation of the second "GUILE_*" example (@pxref{Using Autoconf
Macros}) that does basically the same thing.

@example
(files-glob "my/*.scm")
(non-critical-external (database postgres))
(programs ((my gpgutils) "gpg"))        ;; (my gpgutils) uses "gpg"
@end example

If the SRFI modules (@pxref{SRFI Support}) were a separate package, we could
use @code{guile-tools frisk} to find out its dependencies:

@example
$ guile-tools frisk srfi/*.scm
13 files, 18 modules (13 internal, 5 external), 9 edges

x (ice-9 and-let-star)
			 regular	(srfi srfi-2)
x (ice-9 syncase)
			 regular	(srfi srfi-11)
x (ice-9 rdelim)
			 regular	(srfi srfi-10)
x (ice-9 receive)
			 regular	(srfi srfi-8)
			 regular	(srfi srfi-1)
x (ice-9 session)
			 regular	(srfi srfi-1)
@end example

Then, we could use the following modules.af to help configure it:

@example
(files-glob "srfi/*.scm")
(non-critical-external          ;; relatively recent
  (ice-9 rdelim)
  (ice-9 receive)
  (ice-9 and-let-star))
(pww-varname not_fully_supported)
@end example

@c autoconf.texi ends here
