@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU Guile Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C)  1996, 1997, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2010, 2011
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file guile.texi for copying conditions.

@node Linking Programs With Guile
@section Linking Programs With Guile

This section covers the mechanics of linking your program with Guile
on a typical POSIX system.

The header file @code{<libguile.h>} provides declarations for all of
Guile's functions and constants.  You should @code{#include} it at the
head of any C source file that uses identifiers described in this
manual.  Once you've compiled your source files, you need to link them
against the Guile object code library, @code{libguile}.

@code{<libguile.h>} is not in the default search path for headers,
because Guile supports parallel installation of multiple versions of
Guile, with each version's headers under their own directories.  This is
to allow development against, say, both Guile 2.0 and 2.2.

To compile code that includes @code{<libguile.h>}, or links to
@code{libguile}, you need to select the effective version you are
interested in, and then ask @code{pkg-config} for the compilation flags
or linking instructions.  For effective version
@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}, for example, you would invoke
@code{pkg-config --cflags --libs guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}} to get
the compilation and linking flags necessary to link to version
@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION} of Guile.  You would typically run
@code{pkg-config} during the configuration phase of your program and
use the obtained information in the Makefile.

See the @code{pkg-config} man page, for more information.

@menu
* Guile Initialization Functions::  What to call first.
* A Sample Guile Main Program::  Sources and makefiles.
@end menu


@node Guile Initialization Functions
@subsection Guile Initialization Functions

To initialize Guile, you can use one of several functions.  The first,
@code{scm_with_guile}, is the most portable way to initialize Guile.  It
will initialize Guile when necessary and then call a function that you
can specify.  Multiple threads can call @code{scm_with_guile}
concurrently and it can also be called more than once in a given thread.
The global state of Guile will survive from one call of
@code{scm_with_guile} to the next.  Your function is called from within
@code{scm_with_guile} since the garbage collector of Guile needs to know
where the stack of each thread is.

A second function, @code{scm_init_guile}, initializes Guile for the
current thread.  When it returns, you can use the Guile API in the
current thread.  This function employs some non-portable magic to learn
about stack bounds and might thus not be available on all platforms.

One common way to use Guile is to write a set of C functions which
perform some useful task, make them callable from Scheme, and then link
the program with Guile.  This yields a Scheme interpreter just like
@code{guile}, but augmented with extra functions for some specific
application --- a special-purpose scripting language.

In this situation, the application should probably process its
command-line arguments in the same manner as the stock Guile
interpreter.  To make that straightforward, Guile provides the
@code{scm_boot_guile} and @code{scm_shell} function.

For more about these functions, see @ref{Initialization}.

@node A Sample Guile Main Program
@subsection A Sample Guile Main Program

Here is @file{simple-guile.c}, source code for a @code{main} and an
@code{inner_main} function that will produce a complete Guile
interpreter.

@example
/* simple-guile.c --- how to start up the Guile
   interpreter from C code.  */

/* Get declarations for all the scm_ functions.  */
#include <libguile.h>

static void
inner_main (void *closure, int argc, char **argv)
@{
  /* module initializations would go here */
  scm_shell (argc, argv);
@}

int
main (int argc, char **argv)
@{
  scm_boot_guile (argc, argv, inner_main, 0);
  return 0; /* never reached */
@}
@end example

The @code{main} function calls @code{scm_boot_guile} to initialize
Guile, passing it @code{inner_main}.  Once @code{scm_boot_guile} is
ready, it invokes @code{inner_main}, which calls @code{scm_shell} to
process the command-line arguments in the usual way.

Here is a Makefile which you can use to compile the above program.  It
uses @code{pkg-config} to learn about the necessary compiler and
linker flags.
@example
# Use GCC, if you have it installed.
CC=gcc

# Tell the C compiler where to find <libguile.h>
CFLAGS=`pkg-config --cflags guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}`

# Tell the linker what libraries to use and where to find them.
LIBS=`pkg-config --libs guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}`

simple-guile: simple-guile.o
        $@{CC@} simple-guile.o $@{LIBS@} -o simple-guile

simple-guile.o: simple-guile.c
        $@{CC@} -c $@{CFLAGS@} simple-guile.c
@end example

If you are using the GNU Autoconf package to make your application more
portable, Autoconf will settle many of the details in the Makefile above
automatically, making it much simpler and more portable; we recommend
using Autoconf with Guile.  Here is a @file{configure.ac} file for
@code{simple-guile} that uses the standard @code{PKG_CHECK_MODULES}
macro to check for Guile.  Autoconf will process this file into a
@code{configure} script.  We recommend invoking Autoconf via the
@code{autoreconf} utility.

@example
AC_INIT(simple-guile.c)

# Find a C compiler.
AC_PROG_CC

# Check for Guile
PKG_CHECK_MODULES([GUILE], [guile-@value{EFFECTIVE-VERSION}])

# Generate a Makefile, based on the results.
AC_OUTPUT(Makefile)
@end example

Run @code{autoreconf -vif} to generate @code{configure}.

Here is a @code{Makefile.in} template, from which the @code{configure}
script produces a Makefile customized for the host system:
@example
# The configure script fills in these values.
CC=@@CC@@
CFLAGS=@@GUILE_CFLAGS@@
LIBS=@@GUILE_LIBS@@

simple-guile: simple-guile.o
        $@{CC@} simple-guile.o $@{LIBS@} -o simple-guile
simple-guile.o: simple-guile.c
        $@{CC@} -c $@{CFLAGS@} simple-guile.c
@end example

The developer should use Autoconf to generate the @file{configure}
script from the @file{configure.ac} template, and distribute
@file{configure} with the application.  Here's how a user might go about
building the application:

@example
$ ls
Makefile.in     configure*      configure.ac    simple-guile.c
$ ./configure
checking for gcc... ccache gcc
checking whether the C compiler works... yes
checking for C compiler default output file name... a.out
checking for suffix of executables... 
checking whether we are cross compiling... no
checking for suffix of object files... o
checking whether we are using the GNU C compiler... yes
checking whether ccache gcc accepts -g... yes
checking for ccache gcc option to accept ISO C89... none needed
checking for pkg-config... /usr/bin/pkg-config
checking pkg-config is at least version 0.9.0... yes
checking for GUILE... yes
configure: creating ./config.status
config.status: creating Makefile
$ make
[...]
$ ./simple-guile
guile> (+ 1 2 3)
6
guile> (getpwnam "jimb")
#("jimb" "83Z7d75W2tyJQ" 4008 10 "Jim Blandy" "/u/jimb"
  "/usr/local/bin/bash")
guile> (exit)
$
@end example


@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "guile.texi"
@c End:
