@page
@node Programming Overview
@chapter An Overview of Guile Programming

Guile is designed as an extension language interpreter that is
straightforward to integrate with applications written in C (and C++).
The big win here for the application developer is that Guile
integration, as the Guile web page says, ``lowers your project's
hacktivation energy.''  Lowering the hacktivation energy means that you,
as the application developer, @emph{and your users}, reap the benefits
that flow from being able to extend the application in a high level
extension language rather than in plain old C.

Underlying this argument is the assumption that programming in a high
level language, specifically Guile's implementation of Scheme, is
necessarily better in some way than programming in C.  What do we mean
by this claim, and how can we be so sure?

One class of advantages applies not only to Scheme, but more generally
to any interpretable, high level, scripting language, such as Emacs
Lisp, Python, Ruby, or @TeX{}'s macro language.  Common features of all
such languages, when compared to C, are that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
They lend themselves to rapid and experimental development cycles,
owing usually to a combination of their interpretability and the
integrated development environment in which they are used.

@item
They free developers from some of the low level bookkeeping tasks
associated with C programming, notably memory management.

@item
They provide high level features such as container objects and exception
handling that make common programming tasks easier.
@end itemize

In the case of Scheme, further features that make programming easier ---
and more fun! --- are its powerful mechanisms for abstracting parts of
programs (closures --- @pxref{About Closure}) and for iteration
(@pxref{while do}).

The evidence in support of this argument is empirical: the huge amount
of code that has been written in extension languages for applications
that support this mechanism.  Most notable are extensions written in
Emacs Lisp for GNU Emacs, in @TeX{}'s macro language for @TeX{}, and in
Script-Fu for the Gimp, but there is increasingly now a significant code
eco-system for Guile-based applications as well, such as Lilypond and
GnuCash.  It is close to inconceivable that similar amounts of
functionality could have been added to these applications just by
writing new code in their base implementation languages.

@menu
* Testbed Example::             Example: using Guile in a testbed.
* Programming Options::         Options for Guile programming.
* User Programming::            How about application users?
@end menu


@node Testbed Example
@section Example: Using Guile for an Application Testbed

As an example of what this means in practice, imagine writing a testbed
for an application that is tested by submitting various requests (via a
C interface) and validating the output received.  Suppose further that
the application keeps an idea of its current state, and that the
``correct'' output for a given request may depend on the current
application state.  A complete ``white box''@footnote{A @dfn{white box}
test plan is one that incorporates knowledge of the internal design of
the application under test.} test plan for this application would aim to
submit all possible requests in each distinguishable state, and validate
the output for all request/state combinations.

To write all this test code in C would be very tedious.  Suppose instead
that the testbed code adds a single new C function, to submit an
arbitrary request and return the response, and then uses Guile to export
this function as a Scheme procedure.  The rest of the testbed can then
be written in Scheme, and so benefits from all the advantages of
programming in Scheme that were described in the previous section.

(In this particular example, there is an additional benefit of writing
most of the testbed in Scheme.  A common problem for white box testing
is that mistakes and mistaken assumptions in the application under test
can easily be reproduced in the testbed code.  It is more difficult to
copy mistakes like this when the testbed is written in a different
language from the application.)


@node Programming Options
@section A Choice of Programming Options

The preceding arguments and example point to a model of Guile
programming that is applicable in many cases.  According to this model,
Guile programming involves a balance between C and Scheme programming,
with the aim being to extract the greatest possible Scheme level benefit
from the least amount of C level work.

The C level work required in this model usually consists of packaging
and exporting functions and application objects such that they can be
seen and manipulated on the Scheme level.  To help with this, Guile's C
language interface includes utility features that aim to make this kind
of integration very easy for the application developer.  These features
are documented later in this part of the manual: see REFFIXME.

This model, though, is really just one of a range of possible
programming options.  If all of the functionality that you need is
available from Scheme, you could choose instead to write your whole
application in Scheme (or one of the other high level languages that
Guile supports through translation), and simply use Guile as an
interpreter for Scheme.  (In the future, we hope that Guile will also be
able to compile Scheme code, so lessening the performance gap between C
and Scheme code.)  Or, at the other end of the C--Scheme scale, you
could write the majority of your application in C, and only call out to
Guile occasionally for specific actions such as reading a configuration
file or executing a user-specified extension.  The choices boil down to
two basic questions:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Which parts of the application do you write in C, and which in Scheme
(or another high level translated language)?

@item
How do you design the interface between the C and Scheme parts of your
application?
@end itemize

These are of course design questions, and the right design for any given
application will always depend upon the particular requirements that you
are trying to meet.  In the context of Guile, however, there are some
generally applicable considerations that can help you when designing
your answers.

@menu
* Available Functionality::     What functionality is already available?
* Basic Constraints::           Functional and performance constraints.
* Style Choices::               Your preferred programming style.
* Program Control::             What controls program execution?
@end menu


@node Available Functionality
@subsection What Functionality is Already Available?

Suppose, for the sake of argument, that you would prefer to write your
whole application in Scheme.  Then the API available to you consists of:

@itemize @bullet
@item
standard Scheme

@item
plus the extensions to standard Scheme provided by
Guile in its core distribution

@item
plus any additional functionality that you or others have packaged so
that it can be loaded as a Guile Scheme module.
@end itemize

A module in the last category can either be a pure Scheme module --- in
other words a collection of utility procedures coded in Scheme --- or a
module that provides a Scheme interface to an extension library coded in
C --- in other words a nice package where someone else has done the work
of wrapping up some useful C code for you.  The set of available modules
is growing quickly and already includes such useful examples as
@code{(gtk gtk)}, which makes Gtk+ drawing functions available in
Scheme, and @code{(database postgres)}, which provides SQL access to a
Postgres database.

Given the growing collection of pre-existing modules, it is quite
feasible that your application could be implemented by combining a
selection of these modules together with new application code written in
Scheme.

If this approach is not enough, because the functionality that your
application needs is not already available in this form, and it is
impossible to write the new functionality in Scheme, you will need to
write some C code.  If the required function is already available in C
(e.g. in a library), all you need is a little glue to connect it to the
world of Guile.  If not, you need both to write the basic code and to
plumb it into Guile.

In either case, two general considerations are important.  Firstly, what
is the interface by which the functionality is presented to the Scheme
world?  Does the interface consist only of function calls (for example,
a simple drawing interface), or does it need to include @dfn{objects} of
some kind that can be passed between C and Scheme and manipulated by
both worlds.  Secondly, how does the lifetime and memory management of
objects in the C code relate to the garbage collection governed approach
of Scheme objects?  In the case where the basic C code is not already
written, most of the difficulties of memory management can be avoided by
using Guile's C interface features from the start.

For the full documentation on writing C code for Guile and connecting
existing C code to the Guile world, see REFFIXME.


@node Basic Constraints
@subsection Functional and Performance Constraints


@node Style Choices
@subsection Your Preferred Programming Style


@node Program Control
@subsection What Controls Program Execution?


@node User Programming
@section How About Application Users?

So far we have considered what Guile programming means for an
application developer.  But what if you are instead @emph{using} an
existing Guile-based application, and want to know what your
options are for programming and extending this application?

The answer to this question varies from one application to another,
because the options available depend inevitably on whether the
application developer has provided any hooks for you to hang your own
code on and, if there are such hooks, what they allow you to
do.@footnote{Of course, in the world of free software, you always have
the freedom to modify the application's source code to your own
requirements.  Here we are concerned with the extension options that the
application has provided for without your needing to modify its source
code.}  For example@dots{}

@itemize @bullet
@item
If the application permits you to load and execute any Guile code, the
world is your oyster.  You can extend the application in any way that
you choose.

@item
A more cautious application might allow you to load and execute Guile
code, but only in a @dfn{safe} environment, where the interface
available is restricted by the application from the standard Guile API.

@item
Or a really fearful application might not provide a hook to really
execute user code at all, but just use Scheme syntax as a convenient way
for users to specify application data or configuration options.
@end itemize

In the last two cases, what you can do is, by definition, restricted by
the application, and you should refer to the application's own manual to
find out your options.

The most well known example of the first case is Emacs, with its
extension language Emacs Lisp: as well as being a text editor, Emacs
supports the loading and execution of arbitrary Emacs Lisp code.  The
result of such openness has been dramatic: Emacs now benefits from
user-contributed Emacs Lisp libraries that extend the basic editing
function to do everything from reading news to psychoanalysis and
playing adventure games.  The only limitation is that extensions are
restricted to the functionality provided by Emacs's built-in set of
primitive operations.  For example, you can interact and display data by
manipulating the contents of an Emacs buffer, but you can't popup and
draw a window with a layout that is totally different to the Emacs
standard.

This situation with a Guile application that supports the loading of
arbitrary user code is similar, except perhaps even more so, because
Guile also supports the loading of extension libraries written in C.
This last point enables user code to add new primitive operations to
Guile, and so to bypass the limitation present in Emacs Lisp.

At this point, the distinction between an application developer and an
application user becomes rather blurred.  Instead of seeing yourself as
a user extending an application, you could equally well say that you are
developing a new application of your own using some of the primitive
functionality provided by the original application.  As such, all the
discussions of the preceding sections of this chapter are relevant to
how you can proceed with developing your extension.
