@node Contributors to Guile
@appendix Contributors to Guile

This Guile Manual was written by Mark Galassi, Jim Blandy and Gary
Houston.

Guile was developed over many years by the following people:

@table @strong
@item George Carrette
Wrote files present in Siod version 2.3, released in December of 1989.

@item Aubrey Jaffer
Wrote substantial portions of guile.texi, and surely others.
Changes to: eval.c, ioext.c, posix.c, gscm.c, scm.h, socket.c,
gsubr.c, sys.c, test.scm, stime.c, and unif.c.

@item Gary Houston
changes to many files in libguile.

wrote: libguile/socket.c, ice-9/expect.scm

@item Tom Lord
Many changes throughout.
In the subdirectory ctax, wrote:
    Makefile.in   configure.in  hashtabs.scm  macros.scm    scm-ops.scm
    c-ops.scm     grammar.scm   lexer.scm     reader.scm
In the subdirectory gtcltk-lib, wrote:
    Makefile.in   guile-tcl.c   guile-tk.c
    configure.in  guile-tcl.h   guile-tk.h
In the subdirectory guile, wrote:
    Makefile.in   getopt.c      getopt1.c
    configure.in  getopt.h      guile.c
In the subdirectory ice-9, wrote:
    Makefile.in   configure.in  lineio.scm    poe.scm
    boot-9.scm    hcons.scm     mapping.scm
In the subdirectory lang, wrote:
    Makefile.in   grammar.scm   lr0.scm       pp.scm
    configure.in  lex.scm       lr1.scm
In the subdirectory rx, wrote:
    Makefile.in     runtests.c      rxbitset.h      rxnfa.c         rxspencer.c
    TESTS           rx.c            rxcontext.h     rxnfa.h         rxspencer.h
    TESTS2C.sed     rx.h            rxcset.c        rxnode.c        rxstr.c
    _rx.h           rxall.h         rxcset.h        rxnode.h        rxstr.h
    configure.in    rxanal.c        rxdbug.c        rxposix.c       rxsuper.c
    hashrexp.c      rxanal.h        rxgnucomp.c     rxposix.h       rxsuper.h
    inst-rxposix.h  rxbasic.c       rxgnucomp.h     rxproto.h       rxunfa.c
    rgx.c           rxbasic.h       rxhash.c        rxsimp.c        rxunfa.h
    rgx.h           rxbitset.c      rxhash.h        rxsimp.h        testcases.h
In the subdirectory doc, wrote:
    ctax.texi    gtcltk.texi  in.texi      lang.texi
and portions of guile.texi.

@item Anthony Green
wrote the original code in the 'threads' directory, and
ice-9/threads.scm.

@item Mikael Djurfeldt
@example
In the subdirectory libguile, wrote:
    backtrace.c  debug.c      options.c    root.c       srcprop.c    stacks.c
    backtrace.h  debug.h      options.h    root.h       srcprop.h    stacks.h
In the subdirectory threads, rewrote:
    coop-threads.c  coop.c          mit-pthreads.c  threads.c
    coop-threads.h  fsu-pthreads.h  mit-pthreads.h  threads.h
Many other changes throughout.
@end example

@item Mark Galassi
@example
Designed and implemented the high-level libguile API (the @code{gh_}
interface), based largely on the defunct @code{gscm_} interface.  In the
subdirectory gh, wrote:
gh.c             gh_eval.c        gh_io.c          gh_test_c.c
gh.h             gh_funcs.c       gh_list.c        gh_test_repl.c
gh_data.c        gh_init.c        gh_predicates.c
@end example


@end table
